.\" Manpage for shado.
.TH SHADO 1 "2026-06-25" "shado 0.1" "Shadow Workspace Manager"
.SH NAME
shado \- instant copy\-on\-write workspaces for very large projects
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B shado
.I command
.RI [ subcommand ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B shado
makes huge project trees (0.5\(en1\ TB game/Perforce/monorepo checkouts)
practical to work on in parallel. It takes one already\-warm folder, freezes
its contents into a read\-only
.IR base ,
and then hands out any number of
.I shadow
folders \(em writable copy\-on\-write views of that base. Each shadow inherits the
entire warm tree instantly and stores only its own changes, so a fresh,
build\-ready workspace costs seconds and tens of megabytes instead of a full
re\-sync and a cold rebuild.
.PP
.B shado
never \(lqwarms\(rq anything itself \(em it does not run version\-control syncs,
engine imports, cooks, or builds, because what \(lqwarm\(rq means differs for every
project. You produce a warm folder; shado does the copy\-on\-write around it.
.SH CONCEPTS
.TP
.B base
The frozen, read\-only snapshot of a warm folder. Stored once; shared by every
shadow.
.TP
.B shadow
A writable copy\-on\-write child of a base, surfaced as an ordinary folder. Reads
fall through to the base; writes land only in the shadow.
.TP
.B main
The shadow you keep working in and re\-warm over time; the source for
.BR "shado recache" .
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B shado create \fI<warm-folder>\fR [--name \fIN\fR] [--count \fIC\fR] [--size-gb \fIG\fR]
Freeze
.I <warm-folder>
into a new base and create an initial set of shadow folders (a
.I main
plus
.I C
slots). This is the one\-time setup.
.TP
.B shado recache [--name \fIN\fR] [--force]
Rebuild the base from the re\-warmed
.I main
shadow, then recreate every shadow fresh on top of it. Fails if any shadow
.I other than
the base has uncommitted changes, unless
.B --force
is given (changes in those shadows are discarded \(em commit or shelve them via
your version\-control system first).
.TP
.B shado restore [--name \fIN\fR]
Remove all shadows and flatten the base back into an ordinary folder on normal
disk. The inverse of
.BR create .
.TP
.B shado clone create [--name \fIN\fR] --slot \fIS\fR [--hook \fICMD\fR]
Add one more shadow off the base. With
.BR --hook ,
run
.I CMD
once after mount (e.g. a Perforce \fBp4 flush\fR or a \fBgit checkout\fR) \(em
shado passes the mount path; it never warms.
.TP
.B shado clone reset [--name \fIN\fR] --slot \fIS\fR
Discard a single shadow's changes and recreate it clean on the current base \(em
an instant, fully\fIwarm\fR clean slot (unlike a version\-control clean, which
deletes warm caches and forces a cold rebuild).
.TP
.B shado clone park [--name \fIN\fR] --slot \fIS\fR
Close a shadow without losing work: unmount it but keep its delta. Resume later.
.TP
.B shado clone resume [--name \fIN\fR] --slot \fIS\fR
Re\-mount a parked shadow exactly as it was.
.TP
.B shado clone rm [--name \fIN\fR] --slot \fIS\fR [--force]
Unmount and delete one shadow.
.B --force
discards uncommitted changes.
.TP
.B shado ls
List bases and shadows with their mounts and delta sizes.
.TP
.B shado doctor
Check the environment (privileges, copy\-on\-write backend, store location).
.TP
.B shado version
Print the version.
.SH BACKENDS
The command surface is identical on every platform; only the copy\-on\-write
mechanism differs:
.TP
.B Windows
Differencing VHDX disks (one read\-only parent + per\-shadow children), via the
VirtDisk API. Privileged operations require elevation.
.TP
.B macOS
APFS
.B clonefile
copy\-on\-write clones.
.TP
.B Linux
btrfs / XFS
.B reflink
copies (\fBcp --reflink\fR) or overlayfs.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $SHADO_HOME
Base store and registry. Defaults to
.B %ProgramData%\\shado
on Windows and
.B ~/.local/share/shado
on macOS/Linux.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Set up eight warm shadows from a synced+built Unreal tree:
.PP
.RS
.nf
shado create D:\\Game\\Main --name game --count 8
.fi
.RE
.PP
Get a clean warm slot back instantly after a bad run:
.PP
.RS
.nf
shado clone reset --name game --slot 3
.fi
.RE
.PP
Re\-warm the main shadow, then refresh every slot from it:
.PP
.RS
.nf
# (you sync + build the main shadow yourself)
shado recache --name game
.fi
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success, non\-zero on error.
.SH SEE ALSO
PopBot \(em the multi\-agent coding tool shado provides warm slots for:
.UR https://github.com/popbot-ai/popbot-ai
.UE
.SH AUTHOR
Benjamin Cooley
.SH BUGS
Report issues at
.UR https://github.com/popbot-ai/shado/issues
.UE
